This post is a review of Godel Escher Bach: An
Eternal Golden Braid by Douglas Hofstadter. Technically this isn't really a
"tech" post so doesn't belong in this section, especially since this isn't
really a "technical" book but rather a book employing certain technical concepts
to discuss consciousness and intelligence.

I put it here for a few reasons:
I read this book because of Steve Yegge's blog post (link)
This book discusses stuff like grammars, the halting problem, recursively
enumerable sets, stacks, formal systems, and Godel's Incompleteness Theorem
I don't have enough posts in this section and would like to add some more

This is a brilliant, brilliant book. This is one of the smartest books that I
have ever read, and Hofstadter has a gift in presenting concepts in a humorous,
but educational way, and connects examples from a wide range to bring together
these concepts. I read this book two summers ago during my lunch breaks at OTC
Markets, and after reading this book I started to read some reviews of it.

One of the reviews that I read was by Hofstadter himself, who 20 years later
lamented that most people misunderstood his book as a random collection of
things he finds interesting and about how "math, art, and music are totally
the same thing at the core man!!!" I found this tremendously funny and a little self gratifying
since I thought I was clearly not one of those people. Months later, when I was
recommending this book to a friend, he asked me what the book was about.

Confidently, I answered- "Oh, this book is about how Godel, Escher, and Bach's
ideas are connected and how systems are limited and each chapter is preceded by
a dialogue between Achilles and a tortoise..."

And that was when I realized I needed to reread the book.

So this is my 2nd attempt at reading through Hofstadter's book, with the goal
of really getting what this book is about. Unfortunately, this compression is lossy, as I have none of Hofstadter's wit,
intelligence, and language, so what he says in a few thousand words I am surely
incapable of capturing in a few sentences. My goal here is threefold:
1) to better understand what he is trying to convey in GEB
2) to hopefully have a better groundwork for an eventual third readthrough.
3) to convince you to give the book a shot

So what is GEB about?
GEB is, as Hofstadter describes it, a "very personal attempt to say how it is
that animate beings can come out of inanimate matter." It is an attempt to
describe the emergence of consciousness through what he calls strange loops,
a paradoxical level-crossing feedback loop.

(MC Escher)

These Strange Loops have examples in Escher, Bach, and Godel's work
prevent the creation of a complete consistent system
search for the "central solid essence" underpinning Godel Escher Bach

ch2
meaning arrives from meaningful isomorphisms between theorems of a formal system
& reality
once we've mapped meaningful isomorphism, symbols unavoidably take on meaning
natural question: how powerful can we create our formal systems to be? how much
reality can be mapped?
goal: create a formal system that has all statements of number theory and rules
that correspond to our reasoning

ch3
if we can create theorems in formal systems, are they the same as nontheorems?
in art, is the figure the same as the ground?
there are some formal systems where you can lay out theorems typographically and
cannot lay out nontheorems typographically (recursive, r.e. sets, and recursive,
r.e. languages)
potential complexity of formal systems to "go backwards" that results in
limitative results like the halting problem or godels incompleteness theorem

ch4
meaning arises from isomorphisms- NOT the symbols
therefore consistency is derived from interpretation, not a natural property of
formal systems
inconsistency as mathematical and logical
no system, sufficiently powerful, that is complete & consistent
formalized number theory is incomplete or inconsistent

ch5


ch 6
do messages have inherent meaning? do some messages carry meaning "context
free"
some messages have intrinsic meaning if intelligence is natural "intelligence as
our brains"

ch 7
intro to prop calc
all logic systems require some degree of faith eventually- difficulty in using
logic and reasoning to defend themselves
cant think out of system in prop calc- simple "formalized" derivations
human thought & prop calculus not a perfect isomorphism
    simple precise rules but doesn't mimic human reasoning
its simplicity is useful to be inserted into larger systems- if contradictions
come up its the fault of the larger system not prop calc

ch8
typographical number theory
presents TNT, an extension of prop calc
number theoretic reasoning via rigid symbol manipulation
includes rules, propositions, etc.

ch9
Mumon and Godel
intro to Zen
Godel numbering of a system, mapping symbols onto numbers
=> theorems can be represented typographically AND arithmetically
typographical rules manipulating numerals are the same as arithmetic rules
manipulating numbers
This makes statements about formal systems expressible in numbers, so
expressible in number theory, so expressible in TNT!
with JUST symbols in TNT, you can express statements about other formal systems
can apply GODEL NUMBERING to ITSELF
create TNT numbers, recursively enumerable set representing theorems in TNT
construct LIARS PARADOX in TNT, find a string of TNT (also a statement of number
theory) that is a string about itself
key to showing TNT's incompleteness

ch10
levels of descriptions and computer systems
explain levels of description for computer system (bits, machine, procedural,
assembly)
bootstrapping
build up higher levels to make communication more natural (perhaps logic behind
turing test)
but are computers very rigid or very flexible?
parallel software to hardware in humans
sealing off of layers
don't need to know about bits to program in a higher level
idea of epiphenomenon- visible consequence of the overall system organization
mind (top level) vs brain
can we seal off consciousness and laws of thinking from cells? can we chunk
thinking into subsystems? is consciousness an epiphenomenon or "located"
somewhere?

ch11
Brains and Thought
relating AI with human intelligence, boundaries of "thought"
interested in how thought is supported by the brain
lowest level is neurons
highest level is thought
how closely are two brains related?
localization of the brain
interested in how "concepts" arise in thought in our brain (modules)
    hardware or software?
this is important bc it is an assumption of AI
if we can explain how symbol activation without discussing lower level neurons,
then intelligence is a property that can be replicated outside of the brain
(software property)

ch12
Minds and thoughts
can we map minds onto each other, given the existence of "symbols?"
how do we communicate between two separate physical brains?
what do we have in common (There are some things) and what do we not have in
common?
partial isomorphism
same hardware, core signals
self module too... communicates w other subsystems and symbols

ch13
BlooP and FlooP and GlooP
Finally a chapter on a subject that I understand... good old computer languages
introduces 3 computer languages with 3 levels of power
bloop = language with bounded loops
floop = language with free (unbounded) loops
bare bones turing complete language
gloop = the next level language, doesn't exist if you believe in CT thesis
cannot increase power
related to "http://wiki.c2.com/?PimcPiflPire"

ch 14
on formally undecidable propositions of TNT and related systems
provides two parts of godels proof
introduces the godel string G, shows how it's constructed
if you assume consistency, shows G as an undecidable proposition
proposes a way to "plug G or ~G" in, similar to Euclidean and Non Euclidean
geometry
interested in = how to show that this is applicable to ALL formal systems of
sufficient power, not just TNT

ch15
Jumping out of the system
reapply godels method after you plug in the system with G
idea of essential incompleteness - even when you wrap up additions with a schema
always 1 more hole
typographical mold for these strings => arithmetical mold => can apply godels
method
relation to cantor's diagonal method (being apply to reapply once you add it to
the list of numbers)
godels method depends on basic conditions, without which a system would not be
consistent or sufficiently powerful
introduces Lucas's argument, that people are smarter than machines since we can
always do this "godelization" and machines <=> formal systems
Hofstadter argues that just bc there exists a godelization doesn't mean we can
explicitly find it since we cannot algorithmically do it
i.e. irregular irregularities that make it hard (infinite ordinals)

ch16
Self-Ref and Self-Rep
look into biology and relates our formal system TNT, and an phonography analogy
how do systems replicate themsevles, and how does information travel between
different levels of such asystems?
relate self producing entity and the systems external to it integral to this
self replication
introduces genetics
how dna replicates itself, introducing ribosomes, encoding of enzymes in the
dna, tRNA, mRNA
phenomenon of self rep and self ref are one and the same in two different
systems
relate sufficiently strong cellular support system to permit self-rep to
sufficiently powerful arithemtical formal system to permit self-ref
level mixing in the cells, a very powerful information processing system

ch17
Church, Turing, Tarski, and Others
relate computing power to mental activity, introduce various versions of the
CT-Thesis
pushes forward this idea:
is it possible to simulate human thought in machinery?
if we view thinking as high level descriptions of a system, which is governed by
simple and strict rules on a lower level, can we replicate these high level
descriptions on a lower level that DOESN'T consist of neurons?
AI looks for the chunking of the formal system into an informal, level mixing,
complex informal system
CT-Thesis: (reductionist version)
    underpinning of AI: all brain processes are derived from a computable
    substrate
mental processes of any sort can be simulated by a computer program written in a
turing complete language
model lower level things in order to mirror brain processes that allow real world
understanding
"skim" top level understanding when thinking mixes levels and is not necessarily
deductive
emerges as a CONSEQUENCE of these lower levels
proposes some counterpoints that machines cannot emulate humans, that humans are
in some sense "unattainable"
one argument: humans are irrational, machines are rational
    counter: humans are irrational but their lower levels are not, can be sim to
    machines
intelligence, essentially, doesn't lie in the lower levels, but in higher levels
of mixing

ch18
Artificial Intelligence Retrospects
turing test: how do we know when AI is intelligence?
history of intelligence in programs
"AI is whatever hasn't been done yet" : Tesler's Theorem
stuff like translation, music, checkers, chess, theorem solving
interesting discussion on "changing the problem space" and being able to reduce
problem to subgoals
q of representation of data: how do we store, procedurally, or declaratively?
q: what kind of levels to put in? what kind of "intelligence" and how much to
place at each level? how do these levels interact?

ch19
Artificial intelligence: Prospects
different layers of context: AI idea of frames (kind of like schemas)
discuss how different concepts interact
how symbols are created, manipulated, compared
mechanize creativity, intelligence, emotion
Q: if we can compose a truly beautiful, indistinguishable piece of music from a
computer that analyzes music / art, can we say that this not music/art because
the computer doesn't necessarily understand it?
analogous to someone writing a book, it being interpreted differently, and
celebrated

ch20 Strange Loops, or Tangled Hierarchies
underneath every tangled hierarchy is an inviolate level, whether we see it or
not
godels theorem is not strictly applicable to minds
people are very different from sufficiently complicated formal systems
q: can we hope to understand our minds, or is there some godelian proposition
that makes this impossible?
producing an intelligent system that can manipulate symbols and achieve the
same things our brain can isn't stopped by godels theorem
consciousness as a high level phenomenon
can understand godel string G not in the system, but can understand it on its
"metalevel"
    see how levels mirror each other
emergent phenomenon in the brain is similar, based on a strange loop
interaction b/w levels, top level reaches down towards bottom level and
influences it, while at the same time determined by the bottom level
self comes from being able to reflect itself
self => symbols are used to model the situation and affect the decision
    chunked concept of self in our brain
on a low level it is strict, on a high level epiphenomenon emerge
self reference = idea of godel, brings in nature, music, etc.
eschers art also presents same idea of self reference, and hole in "Strange
loop"
fugue = mixing of levels and voices like in the mind (bach)

6 part ricercar
formal systems and recursion, figure and ground
self reference self replication
hierarchical systems

on a lower level, we are governed by strict rules
on a higher level, the informal systems that exist are a result of entangled
hierarchies, of self reference resulting in level mixing
influencing lower levels that influence us, various symbols that trigger and
activate and change each other
=> consciousness
to simulate consciousness, we must simulate some of these lower levels (unsure
how low, e.g. to neurons)
intelligence, consciousness, etc an emergent phenomenon

Structure of the book
examples
system
read the entire book sequentially

chunking
who am i writing this for?
what fields are in the book?
what does it mean to understand the book?

many levels of enjoying the book
