One of my favorite pieces in DFW's collection of essays, "Consider the Lobster,"
is "Up, Simba." "Up, Simba" on the surface describes DFW's one week spent on McCain's campaign
trail for a piece in the Rolling Stones, but really is a medium through which he
discusses his views on modern politics and captures beautifully and painfully
what it means to be a young voter in America.

I summarized it briefly in my review before, but basically when Bush starts
running negative campaign ads against McCain, his campaign is forced to do the
same, hurting his image as a Good Nice American, a platform on which he has
drawn a lot of voters and won some surprising victories. At a public forum, a
mother tells McCain about her son, a young McCain supporter who was harangued by
push pollers about McCain, detailing his anguish in hearing all the horrible
things being said about McCain and his doubt in real American heroes in
politics (what a weird phrase to say nowadays). McCain, drawn to tears,
apologizes and resolves to remove all his negative ads.

This exchange launches DFW into an amazing soliloquy about the malaise and
apathy modern voters feel, because we can never be sure if a politician is
genuine, or if their entire image and identity is a carefully crafted concoction
of speech bites and rote gestures. It hurts to care, but despite everything
we can believe in McCain because when he was not running for president, when he
was just a POW in Vietnam, we saw the strength of his convictions and can admire
his heroism without fear of an underlying marketer or campaign manager.

As a modern voter, I felt his piece deeply, and I've been thinking a lot about
it recently relative to the 2016 election cycle. The piece was written in ___,
but I think we can put a finger on Bernie Sander's popularity for the same
reasons.

we can debate the loftiness of his ideals, we can debate his limited
political capital, we can debate the economic infeasibility of his plans, but
ultimately we cannot argue that he does not care. sure, it is possible that he
saw the possibility of running on the winds of popular, young, millenial
support, and crafted his campaign around that ideal, and when he actually wins
he would've been just any same old politician, but when we see pictures of him
being arrested at marches for equality, when we see his pristine and consistent
voting record, when we hear his passionate and fiery speeches, we feel that he
really, honestly, cares.

Poll any millenial on the street, and I am sure that you will find that, whether
true or not, and regardless of whose fault it is,
we all share the persistent and permanent discomfort that we are always
being fucked by something big, whether it
be Big Pharma, Big Banks, Big Government, Big Money, or Big anything.

And it is a relief to at least hear someone acknowledge the feeling that we are always being dicked.
It is a relief to feel that someone cares, that someone knows,
A big criticism of Senator Clinton

And maybe that also explains why it is so painful to watch Senator Clinton dab.
